<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>“How do you do, Marya Dmitrievna?” cried the young man in a pleasant, ringing voice. “How do you like my new purchase?”</p>
			<p>Marya Dmitrievna went up to the window.</p>
			<p>“How do you do, <i>Woldemar</i>! Ah, what a splendid horse! Where did you buy it?”</p>
			<p>“I bought it from the army contractor.⁠ ⁠… He made me pay for it too, the brigand!”</p>
			<p>“What’s its name?”</p>
			<p>“Orlando.⁠ ⁠… But it’s a stupid name; I want to change.⁠ ⁠… <i>Eh bien, eh bien, mon garçon</i>.⁠ ⁠… What a restless beast it is!” The horse snorted, pawed the ground, and shook the foam off the bit.</p>
			<p>“Lenotchka, stroke him, don’t be afraid.”</p>
			<p>The little girl stretched her hand out of the window, but Orlando suddenly reared and started. The rider with perfect self-possession gave it a cut with the whip across the neck, and keeping a tight grip with his legs forced it in spite of its opposition, to stand still again at the window.</p>
			<p>“<i>Prenez garde, prenez garde</i>,” Marya Dmitrievna kept repeating.</p>
			<p>“Lenotchka, pat him,” said the young man, “I won’t let him be perverse.”</p>
			<p>The little girl again stretched out her hand and timidly patted the quivering nostrils of the horse, who kept fidgeting and champing the bit.</p>
			<p>“Bravo!” cried Marya Dmitrievna, “but now get off and come in to us.”</p>
			<p>The rider adroitly turned his horse, gave him a touch of the spur, and galloping down the street soon reached the courtyard. A minute later he ran into the drawing-room by the door from the hall, flourishing his whip; at the same moment there appeared in the other doorway a tall, slender dark-haired girl of nineteen, Marya Dmitrievna’s eldest daughter, Lisa.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
